# Postmodern photography

Inventions. They play such an unimaginable part in our history. They helped us survive, create, ease the burden of existence and strive. (And so much more.) But today I want to talk about the invention of photography and how photography has evolved to present time.

## Skepticism and Neophobia

Almost every great invention came with a backlash. Skepticism about the importance of the invention or how this invention "killed" another invention. Just for example, let's see what Socrates said about writing in the ancient times:

> "For this invention will produce forgetfulness in the minds of those who learn to use it, because they will not practice their memory. Their trust in writing, produced by external characters which are no part of themselves, will discourage the use of their own memory within them. You have invented an elixir not of memory, but of reminding; and you offer your pupils the appearance of wisdom, not true wisdom, for they will read many things without instruction and will therefore seem to know many things, when they are for the most part ignorant and hard to get along with, since they are not wise, but only appear wise." 

I think he's got a really interesting point. But forgetfulness in not necesseairly a bad thing. It makes space for new thoughts, ideas and memories that we can remember. Writing is now so engraved in our society, that everyone knows how to read and write. It helped us create and remember our wonderful existence. Without it, who knows what would happen to humans. And yet it was criticised by one of the greatest minds that we still quote to this day.

Now let's shift our attention back to photography. When the invention of photography was introduced to the world, it was phenomenal. It was the most honest and realistic way to portray and remember fractions of reality. Helped us document, archive and remember the moments that have passed similarly as writing did. But of course it recieved a tremendous backlash from artists. They said that the "art is dead" and that painting will slowly cease to exist or to stay relevant. That photographers will steal their jobs and that their lifelong learning journey to portray the world as realistically as possible with just a brush will mean nothing, because a machine can do it significantly faster and more reliable. But history likes to repeat itself. Just as Socrates criticised wrtiting, the artist criticised photography but both of these things stayed relevant to this day. But not only that, both of those things are so engraved in our society that jotting something down or taking a photograph of something is our daily bread. We do it without thinking.

And art still stays relevant to this day. And maybe has greater value than it used to have before the invention of photography. Photography may have helped to shift the interests of artists to paint something completely different than reality. It may have helped to create abstract art, expressionism and more. Since the reality has been explored on the canvas for hundreds of years, why not explore the worlds that our mind can come up with. Photography gave us more space to think about something more than reality, just as writing did thousands of years ago.

## The Evolution of Photography

In the beginnings a photograph took hours to capture and develop. The equipment used to produce these photographs was delicate and little dangerous, because of all the photosensitive chemicals needed. And photographers needed to be swift, because if they waited long enough, the chemicals would evaporate and the photograph would be ruined. A typical photographer was a little bit of a scientist himself. You needed to understand how it worked in order to produce a good quality photograph. We could say it was a symphony of art and science at that time. 

But as the time went on, photography was made more and more accessible. To ease the creative process for photographers and to give the public something to grasp onto and eventually pick up the camera themselves. So that's when film was born. A briliant solution for photographers that wanted to bring their camera everywhere and capture everything. Film made photographers more mobile and not studio dependant. Since the film remembers what it's seen and holds this information, the photographers didn't need to immediately develop them after taking a photograph. That made the public more interested in this type of medium. You needed way less knowledge about photography to be able to produce nice photographs.

Around 1960s photography was so commercialized that every other family household had a camera of their own. People would buy film stock at specialized stores and have that stock developed by the same stores. It was so accessible that you only needed to know a fracion of how photography works.

Then the digital age came. With the invention of computers, photography was reborn. Photosensitive chips got rid of the art of developing a film, because the computer could develop it instead. Photographers were unshackled from the physical nature of photography and they could take as many photographs as they desired. As long as the computer had something somewhere to write it down. And that accessibility of photography made it what it is today. And the evolution didn't stop there. As we improved upon our computing technology to the boundaries of individual atoms, cameras followed as well. They got smaller and smaller, more precise with a very impressive resolutions for that size. To the point when we all carry a camera every day in our pockets.

## Present Day

For us, taking a photograph today is like getting out of bed every day, eating, opening a window, walking, etc. Something that takes so little effort and thought to be done. Which sounds incredible at first, but then you begin to wonder: "Isn't the accessibility of photography it's own downfall?" Here's what I mean by that.

We take bilions of photographs everyday. Of our loved ones, moments we'd like to keep forever, ourselves, the world, work, nature, etc. And chances are, we'd like to share those photographs with  friends, loved ones and strangers. So we came up with social media. A briliant solution for social animals like us. We can share those photographs with the world just as fast as taking the photograph. That sounds awesome. But is it? The sheer amount of photographs we consume on the daily basis is unimaginable for someone from just 20 years ago. We tend to oversaturate our minds with "meaningless" photographs made by strangers that nullify the art and beauty of photography. Photographing became so accessible that it is hard to destinguish from a good photograph to a great one. And often times, the great ones do not hold up to the good ones, because we value more the ones we are able to reproduce or ones we can relate with. But maybe that's just the problem of social media.

Let's talk about our phones. Our personal pocket computers. The day won't go by without us interacting with it. We use it for work, entertainment, to be in touch with everyone and photographing. Our phones are a great evidence of how the digital era of photography and technological advancement made photography so accessible. The lenses of our phones are so small, yet they can produce photographs at the same level as an average digital camera. How is that possible? We are reaching the physical boundaries of electronic circuits and chips, so how can the photographs look better and better on a newer device that has the same lenses and chips as the ones we had few years ago? It's because where we lack hardware, we are catching up with software. Where we cannot fit better components, we make as much use of those that we can fit there. If you grab your phone right now, turn the camera on and take a photograph, for that fraction of time your phone was taking that photograph, it made at least a billion computations to give you that result. Some of those computations your phone has to go through are choosing the best exposure, choosing the right white balance, autofocus, reducing the noise, tone mapping, highlighting the details, if you have more than two lenses it has to fuse two images together, face detection and recognition and so much more. So this begs a question, how much are We taking the photograph and how much is the computer taking that photograph? We only present the subject of the photograph and then our phones choose the best settings for us. It's got to the point where we can barely controll the camera and the outcome. So are we the ones taking the photograph?

I could go on and on about how photography has shifted over the years, but these two examples are very telling about the current state of photography. The medium is changing and photographers have to adapt with it. It does not necessarily mean that photography is dying out, it was born anew in the digital age. Old school photographers still stick with film photography, because maybe they resent this evolution of digital photography, or maybe the physical aspect of it is way more charming than the digital one. Nevertheless even if photography shifts to something else, it will surely give space for something new.

[⇤Back](https://simxn01.github.io/english-for-designers/)
